---
title: "Deploying AI in your business"
date: 2019-01-12T22:14:57-06:00
tags: ["business", "design-sprint"]
draft: false
---
Deploying AI in your business
=============================

How design sprints can help you test a new idea in just 5 days

* * * * *

### Deploying AI in Your Business {#9b33 .graf .graf--h3 .graf--leading .graf--title name="9b33"}

#### How design sprints can help you test a new idea in just 5 days {#299e .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--h3 .graf--subtitle name="299e"}

### A bookseller with a problem {#195e .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--h4 name="195e"}

So you’ve heard AI is revolutionising your life, your business and your
cats. In boardrooms around the world there’s talk of ‘AI strategy’ and a
new industry of consultants has popped up overnight.

Early in my career someone told me there’s no such thing as artificial
intelligence, only artificial stupidity. Now that I work in AI I’m not
sure what to make of that.

I’m going to tell you a story about a hypothetical company called
Sahara. Sahara sell books online, shipping them to millions of customers
every year. Sometimes things go wrong and at Sahara’s scale even very
unlikely events occur all the time. Pretty unlikely for the delivery van
to be struck by lightning twice, but it happens. Unfortunately Sahara’s
customers are unforgiving creatures; they’ve learnt to expect their
orders in perfect condition, *now*.

Sahara’s formidable yet fictitious leader Seth Kezos has an idea: if
Sahara can predict when a customer is unhappy, they can intervene.
Without intervention those customers might leave for a competitor. So
here’s a business objective as old as business itself: *don’t lose
customers*!

Seth talks with the senior engineering team, a panel of very clever
people who surely know the answer. We’ll need a machine learning model,
they decide. Perhaps a deep neural network? Yeah that sounds about
right. And tensors! Flowing tensors. It can of course be trained on
customer return and complaint data — which everyone is fairly sure the
customer service team collect, although no one has seen it. They’ll have
the whole thing done in a Jupyter notebook in about eight weeks.

Seth isn’t convinced.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*gejeBAG1aRDFWOL8Uxz3dg.png)

[Machine Learning gone
wrong — https://xkcd.com/1838](https://xkcd.com/1838/)

### The design sprint {#73a2 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--figure name="73a2"}

We want to build something that’s genuinely useful to the business;
anything else would be a waste of time and money. The business problem
is undoubtedly legitimate and solving it will have a measurable impact
on Sahara’s performance. But it’s also vague: *don’t lose customers*
how? Which customers? At what cost? When? How will it be measured?

What appeared to be a clear goal has turned decidedly murky. Luckily our
CEO has been reading Sprint, a book from Google Ventures. According to
[https://www.thesprintbook.com](https://www.thesprintbook.com):

*“The Design Sprint is a five-day process for solving problems and
testing new ideas”*

Sounds great! Google Ventures work with all sorts of startups so for
them being able to test a new idea rigorously in only five days holds a
great deal of value. While Sahara is no startup a design sprint can help
them too as they embark on their first AI project.

Seth pulls together a team to engage in the week-long programme with the
aim of figuring out what they *really* want to build. This team includes
representatives from Customer Services, Software Engineering, Marketing,
Logistics, as well as Seth himself. It’s important to have professional
diversity as it mitigates bad assumptions. To ensure no time is wasted,
Seth tells the team to cancel other meetings and set up out-of-office
email replies. For most of the week no electronic devices are allowed.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*O68ulH1qJQAGOsPDOw7xwQ.jpeg)

Sprint: how to solve big problems and test new ideas in just five days
page 17. Jake Knapp, John Zeratsky, Braden Kowitz 2016.

### Monday {#14bb .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--figure name="14bb"}

#### Map out the problem and choose a target to focus attention on. {#c516 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--h3 name="c516"}

First a long-term goal is agreed. Next the team maps out the problem
space, before narrowing it down to a specific target. An important part
of the process is capturing information from experts.

### Tuesday {#e3ce .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="e3ce"}

#### Sketch out competing solutions. {#1952 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--h3 name="1952"}

Following Monday’s sessions the team knows what their target problem is.
Everybody takes part in solution sketching, because each person has a
unique perspective. Team members are encouraged to seek inspiration from
a variety of places — sometimes the best solutions come from a different
industry. Solutions are drawn with pen and paper.

### Wednesday {#fce6 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="fce6"}

#### Decide on the best solution {#e2f4 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--h3 name="e2f4"}

The competing solutions developed on Tuesday are anonymous, so
presentation and language is key to making them self-explanatory. On
Wednesday the sketches are placed on the wall like exhibits in an art
gallery. Out of these the team members choose the most interesting ideas
and concepts. The designated ‘decider’ chooses the solution which will
ultimately be used for prototyping.

### Thursday {#7e2c .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="7e2c"}

#### Prototype a solution {#e5e3 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--h3 name="e5e3"}

Often software prototypes eschew good engineering practice for the sake
of speed, then the ‘prototype’ becomes production. Here prototyping has
a singular purpose: to capture useful feedback from users. No code
needed; the prototype can consist of crudely mocked-up user interfaces.

### Friday {#4b80 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="4b80"}

#### Validate the solution {#7771 .graf .graf--h4 .graf-after--h3 name="7771"}

Throughout the week there are a few things happening in the background,
among which is the recruitment of ‘customers’ to participate in
prototype testing. One member of the sprint team acts as the
‘interviewer’. The interviewer needs to be personable, because their
role is to get honest feedback from the customer, which begins with
making the customer feel at-ease. The rest of the team can observe from
another room (with a video link).

After giving the customer the proper context the interviewer asks him or
her to perform some tasks using the prototype and to think aloud while
doing so. Afterwards the customer can provide further feedback on the
prototype and the experience of using it.

### The happiness engine {#6089 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="6089"}

*Fun fact*: you’re about 850 words into this story, and I’m nearly
finished, so bear with me. For an imaginary company like Sahara the
outcomes are imaginary too, but let me tell you how I like to think the
design sprint turned out.

Having considered business priorities and risks the team decided to
focus on one small problem: customers who, having paid for one-day
delivery, see their order arrive late. While Sahara already refunds the
delivery cost in this situation, nothing more is done to make amends.
The delivery refund is the *least* the business can do.

So the scenario which the team would like to test is simple: if
customers are given gifts following a negative experience, will that
leave them feeling happier?

Ok, I know, *‘if delivery late, give customer a voucher’* isn’t exactly
ground-breaking AI (although it might at one time have been called that;
goalposts shift), but it is something which can be prototyped and tested
very quickly and if it works then we know it’s worth spending more
resources on.

In time the ‘customer happiness engine’ can take into account more
sources of data and make more sophisticated decisions — for instance
getting a customer service agent to phone the most unhappy customers,
providing insight into customer sentiment, and later on using buying
behaviour to improve the model. From a vague idea we’ve ended up with a
simple prototype and a set of testable hypotheses that tell Sahara what
they should do next. Think of this as the first step towards something
smarter.

### What’s next? {#14e9 .graf .graf--h3 .graf-after--p name="14e9"}

There’s undoubtedly a great deal of hype surrounding artificial
intelligence. While it’s an exciting field to work in it’s important to
not let hype drive your decisions. Whether you’re using data to gain new
insights into your customers, or building better user interfaces, or one
of the many, many other applications of AI, the focus and discipline
that comes with a design sprint can lead you to a solution that has
genuine value to your business, with experimental evidence to back that
up.
